---
layout: post
title: Outcomes
category: articles
tags: articles outcomes
overview: Positive outcomes are the fundamental drivers we have in our lives. They are our paychecks, a holiday, our family's health, our happiness and sense of self. They give us a reason to get out of bed every morning. Within the context of creating digital strategies, positive outcomes are our goal post for success and enable us to track if we need to change course. In this article we'll go through why we need to think in terms of outcomes to create robust digital strategies and what to look for and avoid in the identification of your positive outcomes.
---

***

# Positive outcomes that digital strategy delivers

The execution of a digital strategy can lead to any number of positive outcomes. We can increase the revenue we generate, create new products and services, increase brand loyalty, drive awareness for a new product, enhance our operational efficiency or any other number of outcomes.

We digital strategists are lucky in that we have reached a moment in time where digital can help you, in some way, achieve any business outcome. We can therefore easily sit down with any business owner, discuss the key goals for their business and translate them into a positive outcome (usually verbatim) that we'll use to drive our digital strategies.

Digital's core strength is in its ability to automate (remove inefficiencies), iterate (rapidly try new approaches) and scale (increase reach). When translating a business goal into a positive outcome we'll generally be affecting change by leveraging one or more (usually all) of digital's strengths.

***

## The difference between outcomes and goals

Outcomes are the byproduct of executing a digital strategy. Some outcomes will be positive, some will be negative. In order to continually improve our digital strategy, it's important to understand the implications of both negative and positive outcomes. For example, if the outcome is positive we should invest more resources in the strategy's execution, however if the outcome is negative we need to dial-back resources and rethink our approach. And although our positive outcomes will in many ways resemble goals, our focus on outcomes as a concept is important because we are just as interested in the negative outcomes as we are in the positive.

In order to create successful digital strategies we need to identify the causal relationships between our tactics and the outcomes they produce. Identifying these causal relationships helps us to better understand the world around us and thereby make more informed decisions on our digital strategies. We'll explore how to create these causal relationships in future articles.

To date, the most powerful method we have devised to date to understand the world around us is the [scientific method](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Scientific_method). The scientific method allows us to make an observation, make a hypothesis on how the world works, objectively test our hypothesis and then have our ideas and conclusions reviewed by our peers. By treating the execution of our digital strategy as we would a scientific experiment, we can effectively leverage the principals behind the scientific method. This means that the outcomes our experiment produces can then be used as data to help us gain a better understanding of what part of our strategy is working. This in turn allows us to refine our strategies and their execution to ensure they deliver more of the positive outcomes we expect and less of the negative outcomes we can’t foresee prior to execution.

***

## The role of positive outcomes

Setting positive outcomes prior to executing a digital strategy allow us to optimise our strategy towards our outcome whilst help uncover unknowns. The digital ecosystem is far too complicated for anyone to be able to predict all of the outcomes your digital strategy is going to produce. And for this reason, it's important to identify success in unexpected places. Doing this correctly has the potential to completely uproot your strategy (in a good way!).

An example of a positive revision of a company's strategy can be found in the story of Twitter's creation. Twitter's founders were originally running an unsuccessful syndicated directory for podcasts called Odeo. The driving force behind Odeo was to create alternate ways for the consumer web to engage with web content. However, the Odeo service didn't seem to live up to the founder's expectations, knowing this, the founders launched a side project that syndicated 140 character text messages rather than podcasts. 

The side project chugged along for a few months gaining initial popularity, then, at the 2007 Southby Sourthwest (SXSW) conference usage of the service jumped from 20,000 tweets a day to 60,000. This initial spike in usage continued in momentum as the people attending the SXSW conference are amongst the most influential in tech. With their side project gaining far more traction in pushing web content in a new direction the founders dumped Odeo and focussed all company resources on Twitter.

Though their business and product changed dramatically, their end positive outcome, to effect the consumption of content for web consumers, never did. 

Odeo was unsuccessful at disrupting how content was consumed online however, because Odeo's founders continued to trail new ways of producing their intended outcome they completely changed their strategy. This in turn allowed them to create one of the [world's most influential content channels][twitter-trading].

***

## What to look for in positive outcomes

The positive outcomes we choose need to vary depending on the size and maturity of the organisation for whom we're creating the digital strategy. When choosing our positive outcomes we need to ensure that we make them difficult to achieve, align with our organisation’s values and to use an appropriate level of specificity.

* **Difficulty:** a core reason for setting positive outcomes is to give us drive, to get us through the tough times. 
The more difficult our positive outcome is, the more drive and commitment we need to invest. Ever since John Doerr [introduced the Ojectives and Key Results (OKRs) concept](https://www.google.com/think/articles/start-up-speed-kristen-gil.html) to Google in 1999, the organisation has consistently [interrogated its staff](http://techcrunch.com/2013/06/09/how-google-sets-goals/) on quarterly OKRs. Google expects staff to set near-impossible goals in order to achieve and build a tight feedback loop. This assists in the measurement and understanding of staff progress in achieving the 'impossible'. After all, achieving 40% of a set of unbelievable, impossible OKRs is better than achieving 100% of a set of pedestrian, simplified OKRs. Since Google’s first OKR, to “organise the world’s information and make it universally accessible and useful”, the company has spawned ground-breaking services like GMail and News, they've unsuccessful many services like Buzz and Wave, and are now looking to innovate in previously unimaginable ways with groundbreaking concepts/products like self-driving cars and Google Glass. The pace of their innovation and ability to try and fail relentlessly is intrinsically tied to their constant strive to achieve the impossible.
* **Align with core values:** it's important that our positive outcomes align with the values of our organisation and its customers. Retail fashion and beauty brand Sephora does this seamlessly.In understanding that their customers are “women who have shown historically that they adopt technology where it is useful”, Sephora [has built](http://www.cmo.com/content/cmo-com/home/articles/2013/5/28/a_digital_customer_e.html) the creation of 'useful technology' into their company as a core brand value. This has resulted in a lot of commercial success by offering their customers various digital services. After launching a version of their loyalty card as an Apple Passbook app Saphora found that the 600K customers using Passbook were [spending twice as much annually](http://www.cmo.com/content/cmo-com/home/articles/2013/5/28/a_digital_customer_e.html) as regular customers.
* **Appropriate specificity:** we need to get more specific in the outcomes you plan to achieve as we gain experience. We also need to avoid specificity if we have little domain experience. A Fortune 500 company has a lot of experience running its business and analysing its market. The expected outcomes we would identify for a Fortune 500 company therefore needs to be much more specific to that of a newly formed startup whose positive outcome is primarily to [search for a repeatable and scalable business model](http://steveblank.com/2010/01/25/whats-a-startup-first-principles/). 

***

## What to avoid in positive outcomes

We need to avoid vanity metrics and look our for unintended consequences when identifying our positive outcomes. 

* **Vanity metrics:** it’s easy to get caught up in vanity metric bingo, ‘we get 1 million pageviews a month!’ This number gives me no indication of whether 1 million pageviews a month is a good thing. If each pageview costs me half a dollar in paid search and doesn’t convert the view into anything meaningful, then this metric is terrible! Vanity metrics are simply a number that boosts our ego. They give us no context on what is really happening. One of the biggest offenders I’ve seen in vanity metrics is marketing departments reporting on Facebook likes. The number of Facebook likes an organisation page receives gives me no indication of the engagement of that community or the impact those likes have on the wider business. A far better outcome to aim for would be positive brand mentions as a proportion of total brand mentions. Within this outcome, harvesting Facebook likes becomes a minor cog that leads to the production of an outcome that has far more ability to impact our business.
* **Unintended consequences:** it's critical we are ready to identify and eradicate any unintended consequences that result from setting and that we are driving the delivery of positive outcomes. A [HBR study](http://hbswk.hbs.edu/item/6114.html) on misaligned goals show that poorly set and managed goals can cause deterioration on employee performance and corrode oranisational culture. A focus on poorly structured positive outcomes can also lead to downright underhanded behaviour. In order to optimise for their initial IPO filing Groupon created a non-standard metric called the 'adjusted consolidated segment operating income', ACSOI. In essence, this number hid the fact that they were [operating at a massive loss](http://money.cnn.com/2011/08/10/technology/groupon_accounting/index.htm) based on the extraordinary amount of money they needed to pay for marketing. As a result, Groupon was laughed out of Wall Street and forced to [update their filling](http://www.sec.gov/Archives/edgar/data/1490281/000104746911007178/a2204399zs-1a.htm) with standard accounting metrics.

***

## Always think in terms of outcomes

Outcomes are extremely helpful in driving our decision making in everything we do. By planning positive outcomes for something we're about to work on, we give ourselves focus. By thinking about possible negative outcomes and mitigating against them (this is known as a [project premortem](http://hbr.org/2007/09/performing-a-project-premortem/ar/1)), we give our thinking robustness. If we are presenting to a client, we can can state our expected positive outcomes at the beginning and end of the presentation - this allows us to have a frank conversation on whether we have achieved our positive outcome. If we did not achieve our positive outcome, we can then delve into the reasons why, which will afford us insight into how we might improve. By thinking about the potential negative outcomes, we can anticipate tricky questions and confront issues in an open and transparent manner without requiring prompting.

Used and evaluated wisely, outcomes greatly enrich our digital strategy and most anything else we do.

***

## Outcomes

* Positive outcomes give us clear goal posts to manage our digital strategies
* We can translate any business goal into a positive outcome that will guide our digital strategy
* As digital strategists we are interested in outcomes because the perspective enables us to identify and learn from the negative outcomes our strategies produce as well as the positive ones
* Our positive outcomes need to have a degree of difficulty, align with our core values and be appropriately specific
* When outlining our positive outcomes we need to avoid vanity metrics and be wary of unintended consequences.

[twitter-trading]: http://online.wsj.com/article/SB10001424127887324743704578443243287840004.html